---
title: Differences Between Ordinary Light and Laser Light
slug: differences between ordinary light and laser light
postdate: February 11, 2024
keywords:
  - differences between ordinary light and laser light
description: "Ordinary light, found in natural and artificial sources, is
  polychromatic, non-directional, and relatively low in intensity, while laser
  light, generated by specialized devices, is monochromatic, coherent, highly
  directional, and high in intensity. "
tags:
  - difference between
categorylabel: Networking and Communication
categories: '["Networking and Communication"]'
image: /images/lightp.webp
weight: 418
categorylink: /categories/networking-and-communication
type: posts
author: Mohammad Jamiu
author_credit: false
author_credit_name: ""
author_credit_info: ""
author_credit_image: /images/imgph.webp
Affliate_Links: false
draft: false
mathjax: false
Google_Ads: true
---
{{< table-of-contents >}}

## **What is Ordinary Light?**

Ordinary light is a mixture of electromagnetic waves of different wavelengths, which is perceived by our eyes as a combination of colors. 

It can be produced naturally by thermal emission (like sunlight) or other spontaneous processes.

## **What is Laser Light?**

Laser light, which stands for Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation, is a device that emits a powerful, monochromatic (single color or wavelength) and collimated (focused) beam of light. 

Unlike ordinary light, laser light is produced not by spontaneous emission, but by stimulated emission through a specially designed device.

## **Differences Between Ordinary Light and Laser Light**

Here are the main differences between ordinary light and laser light:

### 1. Nature of Light

Ordinary light is typically produced by natural sources like the sun or artificial sources like incandescent bulbs, 

whereas laser light is generated using specialized devices called lasers.

### 2. Angular Spread

In ordinary light, the angular spread is significantly higher, typically around 1 meter per meter (1m/m). 

> :bulb: 
>
> i.e. for every meter it travels, it spreads by 1m.

On the other hand, laser light exhibits minimal angular spread, typically around 1 millimeter per meter (1 mm/m), rendering it highly directional.


> :bulb: 
>
> i.e. for every meter it travels, it spreads by 1mm.

### 3. Directionality

Ordinary light tends to radiate in all directions, whereas laser light is highly directional, focused into a narrow beam.

### 4. Intensity

Laser light is characterized by its high intensity, which means it's very bright and concentrated, while ordinary light generally has lower intensity.

### 5. Coherence

Ordinary light emits photons with different phases and frequencies, leading to incoherent waveforms. 

In contrast, laser light produces coherent beams where photons move in unison (i.e., together), maintaining a fixed phase relationship and frequency.

### 6. Radiation Characteristics

The radiation emitted by ordinary light is polychromatic, containing a mixture of wavelengths perceived as various colors. 

Conversely, laser light is monochromatic, consisting of a single wavelength, thereby producing a distinct, pure color.

### 7. Examples

Examples of ordinary light sources include sunlight, incandescent bulbs, and fluorescent lights. 

Examples of laser light sources include helium-neon (He-Ne) lasers and carbon dioxide (CO2) lasers.

## **FAQs**

### *1. How is laser light different from ordinary light?*

Laser light is highly directional and coherent, with intense concentration and monochromatic properties, unlike the scattered and polychromatic nature of ordinary light.

### *2. Can ordinary light be as focused as laser light?*

No, ordinary light lacks the inherent directionality and coherence of laser light, making it unable to achieve the same level of focus and precision.

### *3. Are there any risks associated with using laser light?*

Yes, laser light poses potential hazards, including eye injury, skin burns, and material damage, necessitating careful adherence to safety protocols.

### *4. What are some everyday applications of ordinary light?*

Ordinary light sources are ubiquitous in daily life, illuminating homes, offices, streets, and powering various devices, from light bulbs to electronic displays.

### *5. How do lasers produce such intense beams of light?*

Lasers generate intense beams through the process of stimulated emission, wherein photons are amplified and aligned coherently, resulting in concentrated and powerful light output.